Side effects post (#24)
exactly-once/Home: content/posts/side-effects.md

Let's think about requirements for correctly applying the side effects. Fist, **we want all side effects to be visible before the incoming message is consumed**. That condition includes that we of course don't want them to be omitted. Next, **we don't want any side effects to be visible if the incoming message have not been processed** e.g. because of processing logic throwing an exception. 

Third condition is less obvious. Because we need to always take into account possibility of attempting to process the same logical message concurrently by multiple threads, we need to ensure that the **side effects that are published all come from the same processing attempt**. For example if the message handler creates two blobs, we don't want to allow situation where each blob is created by different processing attempt as this could lead to inconsistent state if these handlers were not purely deterministic. 

> Fourth and the last condition is about efficiency of storage usage. We don't want to crate any garbage so **by the time the message is processed successfully (consumed), all side effects that resulted from non-successful attempts should have been cleaned up**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fourth and last condition deals with the efficiency of storage usage. We don't want to create any garbage so **by the time the message is processed successfully (consumed), all side effects that resulted from non-successful attempts should have been cleaned up**.
```

### Sketch of an algorithm

Looking at the above conditions we can try to sketch an algorithm. In [the previous approach](https://exactly-once.github.io/posts/token-based-deduplication/) we had our side effects (outgoing messages) serialized and stored in the transactional store alongside the business data. This is not a great approach if we want to support generalized side effects as they can be of significant size. A PFD document we want to store or send via e-mail can easily weigh few megabytes. There is no way we can include things like this as part of a document stored in CosmosDB.

> That means we need to actually create side effects as we execute the handler and not store them serialized. But how about our second rule of not having them visible before the message is processed? Here's the trick. **Visible is not the same as created**. We can create a blob but before we tell about it, there is no side effect as far as other endpoints of the system are concerned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That means we need to create side effects as the handler is executed rather than serializing and storing them is a persistent store. But how about our second rule of not having them visible before the message is processed? Here's the trick. **Visible is not the same as created**. We can create a blob but before we tell about it, there is no side effect as far as other endpoints of the system are concerned.
```

> So the first step is to create the side effect. That means uploading the bytes to create a blob document or creating a token if we are sending a message. This part is done when the code of the message handler executes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So the first step is to create the side effect. That means uploading the bytes to create a blob document or creating a token if we are sending a message. This part happens when the message handler executes:
```

```c#
public abstract class SideEffectHandler<T>
    where T : SideEffectRecord
{
    public abstract Task Publish(IEnumerable<T> sideEffects);
}
```

Take a look at the message handling code above. Does it satisfy all conditions? It fails on the third condition of not allowing results from different attempts to be mixed. Let's imagine two copies of a given message are picked up at the same time. Two threads, T1 and T2 start processing.
 - T1 creates the blob
 - T2 overrides the blob
 - T2 creates the message payload blob
 - T1 creates the message payload blob
 - T1 finishes processing, updates the transactional store and publishes a message
 - T2 fails on optimistic concurrency check

In this example T1 published the blob with contents created by T2. We risk creating inconsistent state if the handler used any non-deterministic API (query external service, use system clock, generate Guid etc.). Now let's look at the message sending. Both threads created the message payload blobs but only one managed to publish its messages. That means that the other blob becomes garbage. Let's try to fix it.

> In order to satisfy the third (non-mixing side effects) condition we need to generate unique copies of side effects in each attempt. When we want to create a blob, we can't just create it under a hard-coded name like `pictures-of-cats.pdf`. We need to include a unique component in the URL (GUID). This way each attempt crates its own document and the attempt that wins publishes the URL to the blob it generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to satisfy the third (non-mixing side effects) condition, we need to generate unique copies of side effects in each attempt. When we want to create a blob, we can't just create it under a hard-coded name like `pictures-of-cats.pdf`. We need to include a unique component in the URL (GUID). This way each attempt creates its own document and the attempt that wins publishes the URL to the blob it generated.
```

Last but not least, conditions number one and two. How do we ensure the side effects are indeed published (and the ones that are to be cleaned up are removed) after we know it has been processed successfully but before it is consumed. This one is relatively simple. We need to inject the publishing of the side effects right after the transaction store transaction is committed. This ensures that we don't generate _ghost side effects_ -- side effects that carry the state that has not yet been made durable.

We also need to make sure the publishing happens before we clean up the transaction information from the store.

### Summary

Let's recap what the conditions for a correct side effects algorithm are:
 - we want all side effects to be visible before the incoming message is consumed
 - we don't want any side effects to be visible if the incoming message have not been processed
 - side effects that are published all come from the same processing attempt
 - by the time the message is processed successfully (consumed), all side effects that resulted from non-successful attempts are cleaned up

> Our sketched up algorithm satisfies all four. The side effects are made visible when the transactional store transaction completes. All side effects come from the same (successful) attempt because we ensure their identity contains a unique value. We make sure to leave no garbage by recording the identity of side effects before thy are created and cleaning up data generated by failed attempts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our sketched up algorithm satisfies all four. The side effects are made visible when the transactional store transaction completes. All side effects come from the same (successful) attempt because we ensure their identity contains a unique value. We make sure to leave no garbage by recording the identity of side effects before they are created and cleaning up data generated by failed attempts.
```
